They came from, just about everywhere. New York, Phila­delphia, the District, and some from Chicago [editor's note: tag all places]. They came by bus, train, car and on foot. They all came for the same thing. They came because Adam was in trouble and therefore they were in trouble too. Yesterday Adam Clayton Powell [editor's note: tag as a person of interest] had been stripped of his committee chairmanship and to­ day he may be denied his seat in Congress. They were there to let people know that this was not to their liking. The atmosphere on the Capitol steps was one of a mixed vapor of injustice, impatience and im­potence. Some of the collected gathering wore buttons proclaim­ing “Black Power,* “Justice for Powell and Harlem* and ‘Free­dom Now.* A few of the crowd became orators, became hoarse and became silent. Most milled around in silence. Marion Barry [editor's note: tag as a person of interest], head of the local SNCC organization [editor's note: tag as an organization of interest] was there. He was bearded and dapper in ap­pearance. He was also the chant­ maker as a dozen Negroes joined hands to exhort “Black Power.* He led the transition to “Bring the Black Troops Home* to “Po­litical intervention* to “Self-de­ termination.* This lasted only a few minutes. A younger bearded sympathi-, zer [SIC: error in original] shouted that violence was necessary. “The only way is the Mau Mau [editors note: define Mau Mau here] way,* he screamed. “Let’s use Mau Mau tactics,* he tried again. He was shat­tered by the cries of “Peace, Brother* amidst the general si­lence. The ‘Queen Mother*, brightly bedecked in robe and bandana, began a 30 minute spiel covering the Bible, the history of the Negro in American politics and the his­ tory that was being made that day. She was encouraged by shouts of “you right, Mother* and ‘tell it like it is, mom. She was rewarded for her ef­forts by a five dollar bill passed to her from a man in a heavy raccoon coat. A light-skinned man followed her as the Impromtu [SIC: capitalization in original] speaker of the moment. He described the three fronts that confront the people of the country. The first was Vietnam. The second was the approaching shooting-war be­ tween Jordan and Israel. This signaled the third front he said because the Jews were taking over the country. “Those white policemen down there,* he point­ed, “and these white reporters here ’are slaves too. ‘The Jew runs this Congress, this town and this country,* he continued. The crowd on the steps of the House wing of the Capitol, pre­dominantly Negro [editor's note: tag as a subject heading], often over­ flowed into the street. They were herded back by blue-coated policemen who were everywhere. Across the street, curious on­ lookers paused to watch the pro­ ceedings. Over there the crowd was mostly white and amused. Someone burned a draft card and was cheered for his action. Someone else copied this firey [SIC: error in original] demonstration and soon another and another. The chant of “Burn Baby, Burn* began to echo across the street and into the park. The crowd waited. Adam was scheduled to appear at 1:45 p.m. and there was nothing to do but wait. Another orator appeared. He was tired of “hanging on.* “My mother told me to hang on,* he said. “Everybody tells me to hang on. I don’t want to hang on anymore. I want to be free and I want unity.* The word caught the tongues of the crowd. “Unity! Unity!”, rippled through the charged air. Someone sat down. Several more followed suit. Angry voices urged them back onto their feet. “We been sitting down long enough. Get up, Brothers and sisters. We are going to wait for the man and then we move . “Which way?,* someone asked. “That way !, * was the answer as a manpointed [SIC: missing space between words in original] to the door of the House which was blocked by a solid wall of blue-coats. The ranks cheered and then resumed waiting. Powell was 20 minutes over­ due to appear. The crowd grew more restless. There was a flurry of movement in the tun­nel under the steps. The mass of humans surged in that di­rection. Photographers fought for position among the pushing bodies. Stationary cameras focused on empty space and their cameramen cursed this misfor­tune. It was not Adam. A spokes­ man repeated to the crowd what he had heard. Powell had left but would return in five minutes. The crowd was stunned and then recovered. “What was the vote?*, [SIC: star and comma in original] someone shouted and others echoed. There was still no word on the balloting of the Repre­sentatives concerning Powell’s seating. The group slowly moved back on the steps. The abandoned cameraman heaved, a sigh of relief. Powell had not been seated they knew. Angry voices rose above the muttering. “They see the handwriting on the wall. That's why they stripped him of his power. They ain’t seen a revo­lution yet.* A well-dressed man spoke to his companion, “I been around. I been in a war and I have never seen it like this.* , There was another flurry of activity under the steps and the crowd moved. A man was ar­rested and the people appeared ready to vent their anger and frustration. A large group of the more militant swarmed across the street. Photogra­phers followed but kept a safe distance. It was an uneasy moment. Then the man appeared. He emerged from his car and be­gan walking the last 75 yards to the steps. He was instant­ly inundated by his flock. They screamed his name and clawed their way toward him. Powell stopped to speak at the bottom of the steps but the crowd was too great, too ex­ cited. They thrust him up, up until all could see. In the crush cameras were knocked over but the crowd surged on. Finally he was able to turn and he spoke. They listened attentively. He could say no wrong. He said they no longer had a representa­tive in Congress. “You are our representative, Adam,* the voices in unison disagree. “Adam for President,* they chorused to the idea of a third party. Soon it was over and Powell struggled toward his car. The crowd was everywhere. Once Powell was inside they refused to leave his side. They tried to touch him through the glass and metal. The sleek limousine moved off slowly and they hung on for blocks. Back on the steps the cameras were dismantled and put away. Down on the street weary police­ man made their way toward the station. Across the street, the curious were satisfied with what they had seen and departed. Adam's army had not won the war- had not even won the bat­tle - but they had been there.
